---
title: "variables and types"
date: 2022-02-19
tags: variable types abstraction
---


# variables and types
## objectives
- have a working definition of *abstracting out functionality*
- declare and assign values to variables
- get user input using prompt, and assign it to variables
- create comments in your JavaScript file
- list all the JavaScript data types
- distinguish between primitives and objects
## variables
A variable can be thought of as a container. Specifically, it is a container that holds the value of a data type. Without them we would be very limited with what we could do. Let's start with the canonical first program - the "hello world" program. 

```javascript
console.log("hello world"); 
```
One line of code may not seem like much of an acheivement, yet in this one line of code we have written a statement that evoked an object, a method (function), and the data type string with the value of "hello world", all of which we we will deal with in other sections save for the data type of strings. Now lets update this a bit. 

```javascript
console.log("welcome to the 'hello world' project"); 
console.log("I hope you find the 'hello world project' helpful."); 
console.log("One of the aims of the 'hello world' project is to provide 30 min concise modules for those with little time"); 
```

Now, let's ignore some of the semantic clear repetition as it was used to setup the following question: what happens if the name of the project was changed?
Well, in this case we would need to go to every line of code in our software and update the name of the project. 

This may not seem like a big deal for our three lined program, but as we continue to scale up towards hundreds of lines of code, we would need to seek out where we have used the name and update each line of code. 

Instead, what if we could replace each instance of the project name with a placeholder or container, that can be referenced from one location such that if we wanted to change it, we could simply find this one location, change it and that would update all the rest of the placeholder/container locations. 

Here we run into the idea of ***abstraction*** an important notion across programming and many other fields such as art,  and so on (in many ways it is what we as humnas do... ). (working definition). 

This idea is at the core of programming more generally, *abstracting* computation, variables, functions, functionality, APIs, entry points, data structures, public data, etc is a core idea to programming and we see it all over the place. In ways, the frameworks that we will be looking at solve particular problems by *abstracting* certain functionalities and hiding others. In our case, we are wanting to *abstract out a variable*. 

``` javascript
let projectName = "'hello world'"; 
console.log("welcome to the "+projectName+" project"); 
console.log("I hope you find the "+projectName+" helpful."); 
console.log("One of the aims of the "+projectName+" project is to provide 30 min concise modules for those with little time");
```










Yet, the question I want to raise is in relation to our current topic of variables is, what happens if we want to  

Take the time now to write this code in your JavaScript file in your editor (VSCode), and open you html page in the browser and open the developer tools and go the console. 

The code above specifies writing "hello world" to the console in your browser. 

## notes: 
When first learning to program, it can be difficult to grasp *just what it is we are programming?* Now, we probably understand that programmers program software, and this is most certainly true. But, when sitting down to learn JavaScript, or any of the other great programming languages, 

- what is your goal? 
    - This can seem like a simple question. I mean, you are reading this so you are probably interested in in learning JavaScript (or, ...). But, what I mean by this question of what is your goal? sets out to dig into what is it that you initially want out of this or any other learning 'program' be it free online, or a highly costly degree. Some people have clear goals like wanting to be a web3 developer and earn $100,000 a year. This is a great goal, with a clear(ish) path to success: follow one of the trillion 'road maps' you find on twitter. If you are like me, particularly when I was starting out in my early 20's I did not know what it is I wanted to do, I did not have a clear goal, with a clear path. Did I want a job that paid $100,000 or more, of course, anyone not already earning a living in that range wants to earn more. Yet, I didn't know what I wanted to do, and web3 developer was not even an option. 
    - Returning to the question, what is your goal?, really, and again for some this comes easy and for others it is a struggle, this *was* the case for me. I was well into my late 30's and working on my PhD before I had a clear idea of what it is I wanted to do, what it is I wanted to be. Now, life advice, as such as the type I am writing here, is difficult to articulate let alone communicate due to the uniqueness of every individual. From my perspective, it seems clear that I wish I had "discovered" my personal goals much earlier in life, yet, from another angle, I can't see how another life trajectory could have lead me to the point where I am today, with a particular clarity regarding my own life. Let me say that again and clarify. I cannot see how another life trajectory could have lead me to the point where I am today, (and here's the important part), *with a particularly clarity regarding my own life!* I am not claiming to have clarity about anything other than *my own life*, but it my experience this was the key. at the end of the day - it is your life, and unfortunately no one, I repeat no one, can tell your how you should live your life. We are all caught between being followers of others instructions and reactionaries to what ever occurances have impacted our lives - regardless how mundane or severe they may be. 
    - The point here, is that we all can *learn* to set goals for *ourselves*. Most of us don't start this way, it is learned as we develop from children to adults. For me, setting goals for things I was not sure I wanted to do, was a waste of time. Now, to be clear, its not there were not things I wanted to do, in fact I have more interest than I know what to do with, in fact this was my problem. I didn't know if I wanted to be a teacher, as I also liked making music and art, though I didn't know if I wanted to be an artist as I also liked physics and biology, though I didn't know if I wanted be a scientist because I also liked, playing hockey... (actually I liked sports but was never talented enough). The point is that for me, the problem wasn't interest, motiviation when I was young sure, but not interests, it was being able to think of myself doing something for many years, let alone that dreadful phrase "for the rest of your life". 
    - a start is to set goals - not plan your whole life out, but set goals and work towards them allowing your self to update them when you realize that the goal you are seeking is not quite what you imagined. This raises the issues of discipline vs intuitive (train of thought) such as following the impulses that lead us from our common path vs a long term goal AND how stringent we are in not altering what the goal actually is.  


-  the "underlying program/hardware structure that leads to javaScript"
- physics story
- structured vs bricolage