---
title: "variables and types"
date: 2022-02-19
tags: variable types abstraction
category: 
---


# variables and types
## objectives
- have a working definition of *abstracting out functionality*
- declare and assign values to variables
- get user input using prompt, and assign it to variables
- create comments in your JavaScript file
- list all the JavaScript data types
- distinguish between primitives and objects
## variables
A variable can be thought of as a container. Specifically, it is a container that holds the value of a data type. Without them we would be very limited with what we could do. Let's start with the canonical first program - the "hello world" program. 

```javascript
console.log("hello world"); 
```
One line of code may not seem like much of an acheivement, yet in this one line of code we have written a statement that evoked an object, a method (function), and the data type string with the value of "hello world", all of which we we will deal with in other sections save for the data type of strings. Now lets update this a bit. 

```javascript
console.log("welcome to the 'hello world' project"); 
console.log("I hope you find the 'hello world project' helpful."); 
console.log("For more info one the 'hello world' project ..."); 
```

Now, let's ignore some of the semantic clear repetition as it was used to setup the following question: what happens if the name of the project was changed?
Well, in this case we would need to go to every line of code in our software and update the name of the project. 

This may not seem like a big deal for our three lined program, but as we continue to scale up towards hundreds of lines of code, we would need to seek out where we have used the name and update each line of code. 

Instead, what if we could replace each instance of the project name with a placeholder or container, that can be referenced from one location such that if we wanted to change it, we could simply find this one location, change it and that would update all the rest of the placeholder/container locations. 

Here we run into the idea of ***abstraction*** an important notion across programming and many other fields such as art,  and so on (in many ways it is what we as humnas do... ). (working definition). 

This idea is at the core of programming more generally, *abstracting* computation, variables, functions, functionality, APIs, entry points, data structures, public data, etc. The frameworks that we will be looking at solve particular problems by *abstracting* certain functionalities and hiding others. In our case, we are wanting to *abstract out a variable*. 

``` javascript
let projectName = "'hello world'"; 
console.log("welcome to the "+projectName+" project"); 
console.log("I hope you find the "+projectName+" helpful."); 
console.log("For more info one the "+projectName+" ...");
```

In the end, we should see the same thing in the browser as we did with the first example. But now we could update our code with one simple change. 

So let's take a look at what is going on here. The first thing is that to use a variable, it first must exist, and for it to exist  we must *declare* it. The reserved word (or keyword) `let` is used to declare a variable, followed by giving the variable a name, in this case `projectName`, and then using the `=` sign, or what is called the *assignment operator* we assign the string `"hello world"` to the variable `projectName`. Now, any we invoke the variable `projectName` this variable will point to the the string `"hello world"`.

In the following three lines of code, something else is going on. We are using the `+` sign to connect strings together. In the case of strings, we call this *concatenation*. Thus, the `+` sign is the *concatenation* operator and the *addition* operator when working with numbers. 

